README.md, before:

# ingest

Shared internal tooling for pathogen data ingest.  Used by our individual
pathogen repos which produce Nextstrain builds.  Expected to be vendored by
each pathogen repo using `git subtree`.

Some tools may only live here temporarily before finding a permanent home in
`augur curate` or Nextstrain CLI.  Others may happily live out their days here.

## Vendoring

Nextstrain maintained pathogen repos will use [`git subrepo`](https://github.com/ingydotnet/git-subrepo) to vendor ingest scripts.
(See discussion on this decision in https://github.com/nextstrain/ingest/issues/3)

If you don't already have `git subrepo` installed, follow the [git subrepo installation instructions](https://github.com/ingydotnet/git-subrepo#installation).
Then add the latest ingest scripts to the pathogen repo by running:

```
git subrepo clone https://github.com/nextstrain/ingest ingest/vendored
```

Any future updates of ingest scripts can be pulled in with:

```
git subrepo pull ingest/vendored
```

## History

Much of this tooling originated in
[ncov-ingest](https://github.com/nextstrain/ncov-ingest) and was passaged thru
[monkeypox's ingest/](https://github.com/nextstrain/monkeypox/tree/@/ingest/).
It subsequently proliferated from [monkeypox][] to other pathogen repos
([rsv][], [zika][], [dengue][], [hepatitisB][], [forecasts-ncov][]) primarily
thru copying.  To [counter that
proliferation](https://bedfordlab.slack.com/archives/C7SDVPBLZ/p1688577879947079),
this repo was made.

[monkeypox]: https://github.com/nextstrain/monkeypox
[rsv]: https://github.com/nextstrain/rsv
[zika]: https://github.com/nextstrain/zika/pull/24
[dengue]: https://github.com/nextstrain/dengue/pull/10
[hepatitisB]: https://github.com/nextstrain/hepatitisB
[forecasts-ncov]: https://github.com/nextstrain/forecasts-ncov

## Elsewhere

The creation of this repo, in both the abstract and concrete, and the general
approach to "ingest" has been discussed in various internal places, including:

- https://github.com/nextstrain/private/issues/59
- @joverlee521's [workflows document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1rLWPvEuj0Ayc8MR0O1lfRJZfj9av53xU38f20g8nU_E/edit#heading=h.4g0d3mjvb89i)
- [5 July 2023 Slack thread](https://bedfordlab.slack.com/archives/C7SDVPBLZ/p1688577879947079)
- [6 July 2023 team meeting](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1FPfx-ON5RdqL2wyvODhkrCcjgOVX3nlXgBwCPhIEsco/edit)
- _…many others_

## Scripts

Scripts for supporting ingest workflow automation that don’t really belong in any of our existing tools.

- [notify-on-diff](notify-on-diff) - Send Slack message with diff of a local file and an S3 object
- [notify-on-job-fail](notify-on-job-fail) - Send Slack message with details about failed workflow job on GitHub Actions and/or AWS Batch
- [notify-on-job-start](notify-on-job-start) - Send Slack message with details about workflow job on GitHub Actions and/or AWS Batch
- [notify-on-record-change](notify-on-recod-change) - Send Slack message with details about line count changes for a file compared to an S3 object's metadata `recordcount`.
  If the S3 object's metadata does not have `recordcount`, then will attempt to download S3 object to count lines locally, which only supports `xz` compressed S3 objects.
- [notify-slack](notify-slack) - Send message or file to Slack
- [s3-object-exists](s3-object-exists) - Used to prevent 404 errors during S3 file comparisons in the notify-* scripts
- [trigger](trigger) - Triggers downstream GitHub Actions via the GitHub API using repository_dispatch events.
- [trigger-on-new-data](trigger-on-new-data) - Triggers downstream GitHub Actions if the provided `upload-to-s3` outputs do not contain the `identical_file_message`
  A hacky way to ensure that we only trigger downstream phylogenetic builds if the S3 objects have been updated.

NCBI interaction scripts that are useful for fetching public metadata and sequences.

- [fetch-from-ncbi-entrez](fetch-from-ncbi-entrez) - Fetch metadata and nucleotide sequences from [NCBI Entrez](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK25501/) and output to a GenBank file.
  Useful for pathogens with metadata and annotations in custom fields that are not part of the standard [NCBI Virus](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/labs/virus/vssi/) or [NCBI Datasets](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/datasets/) outputs.
- [ncbi-virus-url](ncbi-virus-url) - Generates the URL to download metadata and sequences from NCBI Virus as a single CSV file.
- [csv-to-ndjson](csv-to-ndjson) - Converts CSV file to NDJSON file with a hard-coded 200MiB field size limit to accommodate sequences in the NCBI Virus download.

Potential Nextstrain CLI scripts

- [sha256sum](sha256sum) - Used to check if files are identical in upload-to-s3 and download-from-s3 scripts.
- [cloudfront-invalidate](cloudfront-invalidate) - CloudFront invalidation is already supported in the [nextstrain remote command for S3 files](https://github.com/nextstrain/cli/blob/a5dda9c0579ece7acbd8e2c32a4bbe95df7c0bce/nextstrain/cli/remote/s3.py#L104).
  This exists as a separate script to support CloudFront invalidation when using the upload-to-s3 script.
- [upload-to-s3](upload-to-s3) - Upload file to AWS S3 bucket with compression based on file extension in S3 URL.
  Skips upload if the local file's hash is identical to the S3 object's metadata `sha256sum`.
  Adds the following user defined metadata to uploaded S3 object:
    - `sha256sum` - hash of the file generated by [sha256sum](sha256sum)
    - `recordcount` - the line count of the file
- [download-from-s3](download-from-s3) - Download file from AWS S3 bucket with decompression based on file extension in S3 URL.
  Skips download if the local file already exists and has a hash identical to the S3 object's metadata `sha256sum`.

Potential augur curate scripts

- [apply-geolocation-rules](apply-geolocation-rules) - Applies user curated geolocation rules to NDJSON records
- [merge-user-metadata](merge-user-metadata) - Merges user annotations with NDJSON records
- [transform-authors](transform-authors) - Abbreviates full author lists to '<first author> et al.'
- [transform-field-names](transform-field-names) - Rename fields of NDJSON records
- [transform-genbank-location](transform-genbank-location) - Parses `location` field with the expected pattern `"<country_value>[:<region>][, <locality>]"` based on [GenBank's country field](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/collab/country/)

Commit message:

Copy fetch-from-ncbi-virus from monkeypox
Copied from https://github.com/nextstrain/monkeypox/blob/12ccb428aabccd9271fe8c5e61533edd656474e4/ingest/bin/fetch-from-genbank

The original script in ncov-ingest has already been removed because of
the switch over to using NCBI Datasets CLI,¹ so I'm copying the actively
maintained version of the script in monkeypox.

I had considered going back to using a single Python script to fetch the
data, but found that the requests library would still run into a
ChunkedEncodingError as previously explained in
https://github.com/nextstrain/ncov-ingest/commit/6af81e7561132dcb155dd70ac61a06e491991120.
Seems more reliable to just stick with curl.

The following commit will update to use the new options for the
ncbi-virus-url script.

¹ https://github.com/nextstrain/ncov-ingest/commit/60d603fd3b43b24cb1274a88158ebe78cde8e1e7

README.md, after:

# ingest

Shared internal tooling for pathogen data ingest.  Used by our individual
pathogen repos which produce Nextstrain builds.  Expected to be vendored by
each pathogen repo using `git subtree`.

Some tools may only live here temporarily before finding a permanent home in
`augur curate` or Nextstrain CLI.  Others may happily live out their days here.

## Vendoring

Nextstrain maintained pathogen repos will use [`git subrepo`](https://github.com/ingydotnet/git-subrepo) to vendor ingest scripts.
(See discussion on this decision in https://github.com/nextstrain/ingest/issues/3)

If you don't already have `git subrepo` installed, follow the [git subrepo installation instructions](https://github.com/ingydotnet/git-subrepo#installation).
Then add the latest ingest scripts to the pathogen repo by running:

```
git subrepo clone https://github.com/nextstrain/ingest ingest/vendored
```

Any future updates of ingest scripts can be pulled in with:

```
git subrepo pull ingest/vendored
```

## History

Much of this tooling originated in
[ncov-ingest](https://github.com/nextstrain/ncov-ingest) and was passaged thru
[monkeypox's ingest/](https://github.com/nextstrain/monkeypox/tree/@/ingest/).
It subsequently proliferated from [monkeypox][] to other pathogen repos
([rsv][], [zika][], [dengue][], [hepatitisB][], [forecasts-ncov][]) primarily
thru copying.  To [counter that
proliferation](https://bedfordlab.slack.com/archives/C7SDVPBLZ/p1688577879947079),
this repo was made.

[monkeypox]: https://github.com/nextstrain/monkeypox
[rsv]: https://github.com/nextstrain/rsv
[zika]: https://github.com/nextstrain/zika/pull/24
[dengue]: https://github.com/nextstrain/dengue/pull/10
[hepatitisB]: https://github.com/nextstrain/hepatitisB
[forecasts-ncov]: https://github.com/nextstrain/forecasts-ncov

## Elsewhere

The creation of this repo, in both the abstract and concrete, and the general
approach to "ingest" has been discussed in various internal places, including:

- https://github.com/nextstrain/private/issues/59
- @joverlee521's [workflows document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1rLWPvEuj0Ayc8MR0O1lfRJZfj9av53xU38f20g8nU_E/edit#heading=h.4g0d3mjvb89i)
- [5 July 2023 Slack thread](https://bedfordlab.slack.com/archives/C7SDVPBLZ/p1688577879947079)
- [6 July 2023 team meeting](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1FPfx-ON5RdqL2wyvODhkrCcjgOVX3nlXgBwCPhIEsco/edit)
- _…many others_

## Scripts

Scripts for supporting ingest workflow automation that don’t really belong in any of our existing tools.

- [notify-on-diff](notify-on-diff) - Send Slack message with diff of a local file and an S3 object
- [notify-on-job-fail](notify-on-job-fail) - Send Slack message with details about failed workflow job on GitHub Actions and/or AWS Batch
- [notify-on-job-start](notify-on-job-start) - Send Slack message with details about workflow job on GitHub Actions and/or AWS Batch
- [notify-on-record-change](notify-on-recod-change) - Send Slack message with details about line count changes for a file compared to an S3 object's metadata `recordcount`.
  If the S3 object's metadata does not have `recordcount`, then will attempt to download S3 object to count lines locally, which only supports `xz` compressed S3 objects.
- [notify-slack](notify-slack) - Send message or file to Slack
- [s3-object-exists](s3-object-exists) - Used to prevent 404 errors during S3 file comparisons in the notify-* scripts
- [trigger](trigger) - Triggers downstream GitHub Actions via the GitHub API using repository_dispatch events.
- [trigger-on-new-data](trigger-on-new-data) - Triggers downstream GitHub Actions if the provided `upload-to-s3` outputs do not contain the `identical_file_message`
  A hacky way to ensure that we only trigger downstream phylogenetic builds if the S3 objects have been updated.

NCBI interaction scripts that are useful for fetching public metadata and sequences.

- [fetch-from-ncbi-entrez](fetch-from-ncbi-entrez) - Fetch metadata and nucleotide sequences from [NCBI Entrez](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK25501/) and output to a GenBank file.
  Useful for pathogens with metadata and annotations in custom fields that are not part of the standard [NCBI Virus](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/labs/virus/vssi/) or [NCBI Datasets](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/datasets/) outputs.
- [fetch-from-ncbi-virus](fetch-from-ncbi-virus) - Fetch metadata and nucleotide sequences from [NCBI Virus](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/labs/virus/vssi/#/) and output NDJSON records to stdout.
- [ncbi-virus-url](ncbi-virus-url) - Generates the URL to download metadata and sequences from NCBI Virus as a single CSV file.
- [csv-to-ndjson](csv-to-ndjson) - Converts CSV file to NDJSON file with a hard-coded 200MiB field size limit to accommodate sequences in the NCBI Virus download.

Potential Nextstrain CLI scripts

- [sha256sum](sha256sum) - Used to check if files are identical in upload-to-s3 and download-from-s3 scripts.
- [cloudfront-invalidate](cloudfront-invalidate) - CloudFront invalidation is already supported in the [nextstrain remote command for S3 files](https://github.com/nextstrain/cli/blob/a5dda9c0579ece7acbd8e2c32a4bbe95df7c0bce/nextstrain/cli/remote/s3.py#L104).
  This exists as a separate script to support CloudFront invalidation when using the upload-to-s3 script.
- [upload-to-s3](upload-to-s3) - Upload file to AWS S3 bucket with compression based on file extension in S3 URL.
  Skips upload if the local file's hash is identical to the S3 object's metadata `sha256sum`.
  Adds the following user defined metadata to uploaded S3 object:
    - `sha256sum` - hash of the file generated by [sha256sum](sha256sum)
    - `recordcount` - the line count of the file
- [download-from-s3](download-from-s3) - Download file from AWS S3 bucket with decompression based on file extension in S3 URL.
  Skips download if the local file already exists and has a hash identical to the S3 object's metadata `sha256sum`.

Potential augur curate scripts

- [apply-geolocation-rules](apply-geolocation-rules) - Applies user curated geolocation rules to NDJSON records
- [merge-user-metadata](merge-user-metadata) - Merges user annotations with NDJSON records
- [transform-authors](transform-authors) - Abbreviates full author lists to '<first author> et al.'
- [transform-field-names](transform-field-names) - Rename fields of NDJSON records
- [transform-genbank-location](transform-genbank-location) - Parses `location` field with the expected pattern `"<country_value>[:<region>][, <locality>]"` based on [GenBank's country field](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/collab/country/)
